welcome to the show I'm Jordan Harbinger
several years ago I met an FBI hostage
negotiator who had revolutionized the
way the FBI deals with terrorists bank
robbers and other hostage takers who
would gladly hold a gun to your head to
get what they wanted now my good friend
Chris Voss is one of the leading experts
on negotiation anywhere today we'll
learn the subtle art of letting someone
else have our way using psychological
leverage archetypes of different
negotiators and personalities as well as
something called the Black Swan rule
treating others not the way we want to
be treated but the way they want to be
treated now there's a reason that Chris
has changed the way we negotiate with
both terrorists and teenagers at home or
the home office and if you liked our
previous three-part series on
negotiation with Alex Koontz then you'll
really love what Chris and I have for
you on this episode of the show remember
there are worksheets for every episode
this one is no exception those are at
Jordan Harbinger calm in the show notes
and also check out six-minute networking
if you want to learn how I book all
these amazing people for the show that's
over at Jordan Harbinger comm slash
course we teach you my networking tips
and tricks' systems to keep it all
engaged all right here's Chris Voss I
read the whole book of course again
which is great because you still learned
there's so much in the book it reads
like a more interesting instruction
manual or textbook with actual stories
which most textbooks don't have because
there's never any practical application
the things you read in a lot of
textbooks but I noticed that even after
how long you been doing the FBI thing
how long were you doing that 20 years 24
years 24 years you said you still feel
fear during the negotiations what do you
mean by that what why are you still
feeling fear after well you know I mean
that nobody ever gets away from it
you're wired into it it really would
just matters what you're scared of it's
nothing that scared it's what were you
scared of you know I'm scared of not
doing a good job I'm scared I miss
something I it took me a long time to
realize I'm actually scared of being
afraid scared of being scared yeah you
know like like the like if fighting
words for me you're coward because the
last thing I want to be as a coward or
the what conversely
you know the worst one of the worst
names I ever call him but it's a coward
like if I say you're a coward
I probably despise you okay yeah where
are you from woods Europe Iowa okay is
that a cause that sounds like it's like
a Texas thing okay so how boy like all
he called me yella yeah Marty McFly yeah
because me yeah that's kind of what I'm
thinking if somebody called me a coward
I'm like I don't know how personally
would I take that yeah right now they're
different yeah we resonate with
different words now I don't think it's
an Iowa thing I think people are guilty
that everyone sure you know it's a
little bit you know were you born
I mean we believe you know my company
that you're born one of three types
fight flight or make friends it's a
descendents from the caveman days and
people who put it in other ways you know
caveman saw something you know do I eat
it does it eat me can I make with it
it's the same thing yeah I happen to be
from the fight tribe so okay but the
world splits pretty evenly into thirds I
mean you get into a real problem the
prompt rejection bias I am normal if you
will thinking that other people think
like us yeah so for flight we think
everybody's fight yeah yeah that you
know you think everybody's like that I
can remember first time I got introduced
to a concept I was was when I first went
up to Harvard Law School's from
negotiations course in their executive
class and they gave us his tki
thomasgillam and conflict mode
instrument breaks you into five types
knocked you out you're left with one of
those three and remember the sitting
there thinking like every one of my
hostage negotiators damn well better
being assertive because we got people's
lives on a line projection you know it's
how I am that's what it takes to do the
job as it turns out that's only one each
type has stuff they bring to the table
that are necessary no one type has the
market cornered and as I looked over my
hostage negotiators I had those that
were primary analysts and I had those
that were primarily relationship
oriented people and I was primarily
assertion and what you really need is
all three so that just happens to be the
tribe I started out and and you got to
learn the rest so we have personality
archetypes that affect our negotiation
is that what I'm hearing that's who that
would
yes okay yeah and you measure that from
a tester you just kind of say this
person is this one this person is that
one based on their you know you're gonna
get you can get a pretty good feel early
on
problem when you have miscommunications
and miss matches and communications or
barriers you know impasse is almost
always a type problem a type mismatch
problem misunderstanding of a
conversation classic example the
accommodative relationship oriented type
the worst thing they can do to you is
stop working on a relationship because
that's the thing they value most if
we're talking it's awesome if I shut up
it means I hate you or I'm furious the
meanest thing relationship or in person
can do is give you the silent reading
you know and that's how these signal
fury now the analytical type on the
other hand love silence because they
live to think so you get an analyst
analyst and a comedy are talking to each
other the analyst goes silent because
they grateful for the opportunity to
thank the accommodated relationship
oriented type is like oh my god they're
upset I better talk the analyst can't
think because the accommodator keeps
talking right this is just like you
should shut up and the commenter is
going I gotta talk and if the other
person is assertive or relationship
oriented I should say and then viana was
just thinking the relationship oriented
person's going oh they're mad at me
they're angry right so we have that it's
kind of like the internet book the five
love languages or something
yeah it's for relationships of course
but it sounds like these personality
archetypes exist in negotiation as well
yeah and so do you in the beginning of
any negotiation do you try to ascertain
which type of communication style the
other party has is that important well
you want you want to you want to pull
you know pull the information as you go
in reality should be working and having
a great relationship all the time so you
know we like to start with of the nine
negotiation skills there's two that
everybody likes and so you start out
with that till you know the other type
which is basically you know really
listening really dial in and because
everybody wants to be listened to and
then if you run into problems your first
question is
probably misinterpreting what they say
you know problems on mind it's sort of
like the real problem with
cross-cultural negotiations everybody
wants to learn cross-cultural
negotiation yeah because I still want to
be me but I want to know the tiny little
things I got to do to make you happy so
I can still be me like an American
alright so don't show the bottom of my
feet to somebody from the Middle East
and don't shake with my left hand and
then I could do everything else wrong
yeah yeah you know we're looking for
shortcuts as opposed to really adapting
to the other side right so we look for
these kind of even know you'd call them
sound bites yeah go don't cross your
foot and point it at the Saudi prince
because that'll make them mad and then
right while you just ignore all of the
other more nuanced exactly the things
that would actually require work to
learn and practice right yeah better to
just open up a fortune cookie and learn
something yeah that makes sense okay and
I know that you use this in parenting
which makes sense you got to negotiate
with kids but what about people day to
day I mean are you looking at
personality archetypes and communication
or negotiation styles with everybody
that you meet kind of automatically you
know it's you know are you looking for
it or you're focusing on it or are you
just trying to remain aware of it right
right and it's a little bit more just
remaining aware of it or so and make
some predictions about how people are
gonna react to different sorts of
gestures you know an assertive type I'm
a natural-born a certain you know we're
not good at reciprocity because we think
we're so logical that if you gave us
something it was only logical that you
should give it to me therefore I don't
know just a little sense of entitlement
maybe yeah you could call like that if I
got it I should have got it the
relationship oriented person we want to
trade stuff back and forth all the time
so if I give you something I'm really
happy I'm like a puppy dog with a ball
you know throw the ball again let's do
it again
and we get really flummoxed when the
assertive just seems to be completely
oblivious there you gotta throw the ball
back and the assertive is thinking like
what's your problem you know I don't
know what the matter with you so tiny
little things like that again
you it's when there's an impact
somebody communication is broken down is
probably gonna be type mismatch I wonder
if it's been a little annoying since
you've written the book dealing with
family and friends where they they look
at every action that you have that you
do and they're like oh I'm not doing
that you're doing this thing that you're
doing the reciprocity thing I'm not
playing that game
ah the hardest part is with my
girlfriend oh yes because she's heard me
give a thousand interviews talking about
this stuff so she's heard me talk about
her guard gets up a little bit and I'm
like you know I can what is that what is
that line from the movie the negotiator
okay you know Kevin Spacey
the character he's playing I can listen
to you and actively listen at the same
time yeah it's in a way people people
get that people do get a little
defensive the closer they are to you the
more defensive they might get oh man how
do you shut that down because I would
imagine there's people especially if
you're dealing with a somebody who's
also really aware of negotiation skills
or your say you're not dealing say
you're dealing with it like a terrorist
and the Philippines which you talk about
in the book are they if they're reading
into your actions that could kind of
blow up in your face because even if
you're not trying to do some sort of
trick to them they might perceive it
that way and you have to manage that
yeah well all right so first of all it
kind of starts with who's where's the
other side coming from like if my son
and I use negotiation techniques all the
time he's my chief operating officer
he's a print he's a chief negotiator for
a company the word we want to
collaborate so of course we should be
able to use negotiation techniques with
each other we'll both come from a great
place or potential clients you know if a
client wants to cheat us then that come
from a good place we're probably not
going to make a deal with them we're not
trying to cheat our clients you know so
they don't need to have their guard up
around us what we're gonna over deliver
so it's really on where you're coming
from now then you're talking about a
terrorist there most of them that
negotiate are the classic assertive
negotiator and I got one or two moves
period they're used to intimidating
people and that's it they're demanding
name-calling assertive
the craziest thing is that I didn't
realize when a book was written but we
realized since we come out the
procurement negotiator in business is
almost the exact same type as the
kidnapping negotiator internationally
well wait so so somebody somebody in Abu
Sayyaf is the same as the procurement /
guy one one just has a fancier rifle and
maybe a hostage right people they in
business boy they they intimidate they
call names they do everything they can't
to pound a heck out of the other side
huh I am imagining we're gonna get some
emails from procurement people they're
like it's not true I'm not like that
you don't start with bad ones every no
no here's a funny thing every we do a
lot of open enrollment training 50
people in a room there's always one or
two procurement people there and you
know I'll say anybody here from
procurement and get out well let stay
but I'll say tell me I'm wrong about you
guys tell me I'm wrong really and every
like now you know I mean I was said I
was a lot of procurement people in
supply chain I was at a supply chain
conference one time one of the guys was
talking me off to the side and he said
you know we you know when you
procurement you got to be really careful
that you're not suppliers
you're the biggest customer or only
customer because you'll end up putting
them out of business right and I
remember thinking to myself if you're
doing did you hear what you just said
they know there's yeah it's not win-win
at all at that point it's not good not a
good the big advantage is to and sales
people are horrified of procurement I
mean they find out procurements on the
other side and they just start to have
nervous breakdowns
the only time procurements going to be
involved is when they really want you
can you explain what procurement is so
in case people don't don't know German
are the the buyers the contracts
negotiators
calls them contracts negotiators some
companies call them there either in
contracting northern German those will
be their titles but their job is to buy
on behalf of the organization okay now
what happens is the organization will
identify a supplier they want and then
procurement becomes involved procurement
does not waste their time on suppliers
they have no interest in ever so if
procurement gets in a game with you
buckle up let them call you names don't
get upset
calm down they're only talking to you
because they really want you and if we
realize that up front chasing them down
the don't get scared right you know I I
had a director of sales call me says I
want you to teach my people how to not
cut the price when someone from
procurement calls us with 48 hours left
in a quarter and I remember thinking to
myself if you even have to ask me that
question your structural problems are
far out of my ability to change but the
reality is all I could do is say no
because the procurement guy who calls
with 48 hours left and a quarter feels
that's the only time the entire quarter
he had leverage 48 hours his leverage is
gone right so wait 48 hours
well you don't wait 72 hours you got
them interesting yeah I think a lot of
people don't know that they have any
leverage that's also in never split the
difference is that you always have
leverage and I thought well wait a
minute what about in a kidnap situation
they got your aunt you don't have any
leverage but even then you have leverage
and it's a it's a classic example that
we love to ask people the person with
all the leverage you know I got your
aunt you got you the ones got the
leverage
cash is king right who's got the cash
yeah you know they don't you probably
don't actually want my family member
ha ha ha screaming and whining in your
basement I'm gonna give them back yeah
if you want to get rid of that person I
tried them for a briefcase full of money
at that point some point yeah
ya know but the it's a it's a buyers
market kidnapping in reality is a buyers
market but that gets back to leverages
in the eye of the beholder that's true I
suppose because unless you're talking
about you're an American and you're
being held by a group overseas your aunt
is only really valuable to you they
can't turn around and go oh well we got
a better offer for your aunt from this
other person down the street yeah yeah
yeah it's like you're the only buyer for
that particular product
exactly you might really want that
product you might really want your aunt
back but nobody else can outbid you
there's nobody else exactly yeah that's
interesting I hadn't really thought
about that I thought for sure the
exception - you always have leverage was
when you were talking about a kidnapping
but actually even even there yeah was
sort of amazing huh well and your stuff
has to work because if if your
negotiation techniques don't work in the
FBI for hostage situations someone
someone dies theoretically yeah let me
draw a fine line cuz I had to learn that
early on - I learned it from my old boss
Gary Nestor but he would always told us
and it took me a while to figure out
what it meant we got the best chance of
success
we never guaranteed anybody success we
just guaranteed them the best chances so
by death you know you said it's always
got to work best chance of success if it
works 99 times out of 100 0 100
kidnappers you're gonna lose one person
oh man so you always have to be kind of
ready for that emotionally you should be
I don't know that you're ever actually
ready till it happens and but then
depending upon how have you you prepared
yourself accepted and told yourself at
least intellectually that it was a
possibility then you get through it and
what I ended up doing was I actually
pointedly recruited the veteran kidnap
negotiators with people that have been
in situations that somebody got killed
who are the best because the other thing
at that point in time - is one of two
things happen if you're kidnapping
negotiators somebody that's killed you
say you know what I could do something
else you know like a different job let
me let me go do something else within
the FBI I don't got an appetite for the
you know I wanna whatever it is you know
maybe I want to do witness support I
don't know what but they're gonna decide
I think that much fun or they're gonna
say I'm never gonna let this happen
again I'm gonna double down I'm gonna
get smarter I'm gonna work harder I'm
gonna go back I'm gonna think about
every single thing I did and if there's
one even the tiniest thing I would
change or get better at I'm gonna go
back and get better at it and those
people would become the best negotiators
because we're always going to propose
solutions to scare people what do you
mean by that um I might say stop talking
to the bad guys now yeah that would
freak me out I'd be like I want to keep
talking with them because I feel like as
long as I keep talking with them my
wife's gonna be okay exactly sure but we
may know from the profile of the
situation that at this point in time if
we stop talking the other side's gonna
get worried in order to regain control
instead of doing something negative
they're gonna do something positive
because then they can regain control and
a completely different mindset so let's
let's give them let's trick them into
doing something positive because they're
gonna try to regain control and they'll
they'll be real specific instances where
that will be crystal clear that that's
what they're gonna do oh man to be
sitting next to you must have a lot of
people standing next to you especially
during these kidnap situations where
they're like you better be damn sure
about this because you're sitting there
like alright well what we're gonna do is
we're gonna leave them alone for 24 to
48 hours and then they're probably to
put your your mom on the phone and then
that person's like what are you talking
about you better be right about this
right how do you gain that person's
trust or do they just have to trust you
got to know that moments coming okay if
you know what's coming you prepare in
advance so you tell them in advance hey
look we might have to ghost them for a
couple days
just be ready for them well I'm gonna
say you know there's a really good
chance we're gonna do something that's
gonna scare the hell out of you you know
I don't know exactly how all this is
going you know I got a team with me this
is not just me saying this I got a team
I I'm a representative of
our entire body of institutional
knowledge this is not my decision
everything I do I bounce off a lot of
people by wente in advance we're gonna
ask you to do stuff that scares the heck
out of you and actually and I'm I'll say
them I'm gonna tell you in advance I
want you to be scared it's gonna help us
in a negotiation how's that well what
actually happens when you do that first
of all the bad guys if they satisfied
you're scared they think they got the
upper hand and they relaxed you know
fear is their control mechanism so their
overriding desire is for you to be
scared yeah mission accomplished if
you've got some kidnapped relatives now
they think they're gonna get what they
want and they they relax
they're less worried about deadlines
they don't make so many threats they
chill out but the other really crazy
thing about the way the brain works is
if you have a negative emotion and you
say fear and instead of me trying to say
eliminate fear I say I like it it'll
make it go away right it dissipates
takes the edge off problem takes it
takes the edge off tremendously because
you'll be like what you want me to be
scared I'm not trying to suppress it at
that point as soon as you stop trying to
suppress it it's one of the keys to
making it go away okay so this ties in a
little bit with what you wrote about
with cognitive I think with cognitive
bias and having to with knowing that we
all suffer from this cognitive bias we
can't just have these robotic
negotiations and part of that is there's
an emotional component to negotiation a
lot of people think oh if I do this
they're gonna do this if they do this
then we're gonna do that and that's sort
of like a rational computer program
right negotiation right and that doesn't
work because we have to take into
consideration this emotional component
of negotiation how do you prepare for
that are you looking at kind of a road
map in your head of all right the
logical response would be this but I
think that we've got this emotional
component where they're freaking out
because the military is looking for them
in the jungle so there's a little bit of
fear or there's a little bit of urgency
that they're feeling that wouldn't
dictate this type of response how do you
how do you even know are you able to
predict what the other side is gonna do
most of the time or are you looking at
maybe two outcomes the logical outcome
and the emotional outcome and it's going
to be one or the other well we
there's no such thing as logic first of
all at all at all period okay
it's like beauty it's in the eye of the
beholder no it's logical to you and
what's logical to me we're gonna make up
based on what we care about mhm
which then sort of takes the definition
of logic out if it's based on what you
care about so we start that there's
emotional tension we'll try to think
about two to three moves ahead no more
than that and we'll think in and and
we'll think on a couple two or three
different sets of outcomes now we're
never going to hit one exactly but
actually if we think on both extremes
and we're prepared for extremes it's
going to land someplace in the middle
and we're gonna be prepared for no
matter what the reason why you don't
think more on three moves ahead is and
it's kind of hard to envision this but
everybody wants to think in terms of
chess you know rotations chess right
well just connect all the pieces with
Springs under tension because when you
make a move in chess all the other
pieces stay in exactly the same place
but if they were all connected by
Springs every time you moved one they'd
all move a little bit and by the time
you'd made two or three moves almost all
the chess pieces would have reset which
meant all of your analysis is now gone
because the entire board got reset and
that's what happens with emotion so you
think I don't know roughly where I want
to end up there's about five different
ways to get there let's see which one we
go off on first so you're not looking at
like okay we do this and then that's
probably gonna happen then we're gonna
do that and that's probably gonna happen
do you have to take each move
individually based on where you are
right in that moment because if the
chess pieces are all moving every time
you do something then you're dealing
with a whole new scenario after each
move that much after about after each
third move like you get a pretty good
idea what the next move is gonna be but
you go very much farther than that and
I'll give you an example Chase Manhattan
Bank we talked about it in the book yeah
the bank robbery bank robbery i I'm a
second negotiator on a phone
humid gown as a commander of the NYPD
team he puts me on a phone he takes this
guy off he says you're up you're next
this is what I want you to do
bad-guy been hiding his name from us the
whole time we're pretty sure we knew who
he was by the time I'm getting ready to
get on a phone
we'd also been talking to him about
letting hostages go is this crit is it
Chris Watts
guy named Chris walks yeah hey great
first name right yeah depends on depends
on your emotional perspective yeah but
all right so we're asking about hostages
we got no reason to believe he'd hurt
the hostages which was bad analysis he
beaten all of them at that point and
that's we didn't know that's a bad sign
I would assume generally it's a bad sign
so Hugh says we're gonna switch up and
go is we're not the ordinary
Hancock handoff with Jordan be like
Chris is gonna come on the phone chris
has been listening the whole time let me
introduce Chris and you have been
listening the whole time I have okay
that's the normal handoff and I would
say hi I'm Chris you know I've been
sitting with Jordan the whole time and
as a matter of fact I've been listening
to everything here's everything I heard
why would you switch negotiators sorry
to interrupt you but I'm curious what
why go hey Jordan was negotiating with
you before he's gone now now it's me Oh
what's the point of that it could be
you're doing a bad job yeah that's
probably why it also could be you and
the hostage taker I have got such a
great relationship going that the minute
he comes out the relationships over and
that's why he won't come out Oh
interesting so there's this he wants to
keep that going for some reason some
psychological attachment to the
negotiator yeah I was I was I was on I
was on another barricade and I'm
listening and the hostage the guy was
barricaded and a negotiator having such
a great conversation I turn the
commander and I said he ain't coming out
as long as he gets to talk to Jordan
we're gonna be loves only friend
yeah George is only proud man so it
could be a variety of reasons you know
you got to call in a moment but anyway
Hugh puts me on the phone and he says
we're not gonna do the ordinary handoff
you're just kind of take over the phone
so you're talking to me now and we're
gonna do it really abruptly all right
and then when you get a chance you can
do a couple of other things
so we do a complete abrupt shift and our
bad guy is kind of like oh well play
games with me huh now of course this is
not what he says but he talked to me for
a few moments puts me on hold he goes
and gets a hostage with no warning and
all of a sudden I hear a woman's voice
on the other and the phone say I'm okay
mm-hmm and I I'm sorry who is this who
is this she says I am okay and then the
phone goes dead she goes away now not in
a million years we have predicted that
going forward but he's like you want to
play games I'll play games too he goes
and gets a hostage he puts her on the
phone doesn't say anything threatening
he never gets on the phone and says now
I want to remind you I got hostages it's
all implied because he also knows the
bank is surrounded with the seventh
largest standing army in the world
NYPD 7th largest standing army in the
world they got 50 caliber machine guns
they got SWAT guys they got bombs
he's one of he killed he's smart enough
to imply a threat without stating a
threat because he knows if he says you
got an hour if you want to keep the
hostage alive what's gonna go in and
somebody's gonna put a little red dot on
his forehead he's gonna be gone but we
never could have predicted that move and
if we if we had a whole game plan mapped
out that we were sure was gonna work
that would have all been wasted time as
soon as he put the hostage on the phone
cuz it blew the Planum - that's my
chessboard it reset the chessboard what
was the point of the abrupt shift in
negotiation and negotiators without
doing a handoff what was that why do
that we were trying to show him and us
more maybe not entirely subtle way that
we were in charge and you can do that
you can do in any negotiation you could
risk something the other side might not
like if you've been stalemated for a
really long time and we'd been
stalemated for five hours and a
stalemate by definition is a low threat
level so it's you know risking a u-turn
and what happens after you turn it come
becomes an s-curve
and you come around someplace else and
you're in a better place okay so we we
were risking a setback because it we'd
been stuck for so long you mentioned
that when people feel listened to they
listen to themselves more and they
clarify their demands and their desires
so how would that look in practice is
that because what I'm imagining this I'm
imagining somebody just kind of being
fake-nice to the hostage-taker on the
phone so that they feel heard or
something I guess I'm trying to imagine
what this would look like in practice
well in a bank or in a business
negotiation well I guess the exciting
version is the bank robbery but the
practical situation is the the business
negotiation yeah well you know I could
say look you you you know you see you're
not gonna hurt a hostage but you're not
gonna let anybody go you know how those
things add up you know you know I'm
gonna I'm gonna if I need you to hear
what you're saying I need to pick out a
couple things that you say that don't
add up and then I say how do those add
up so you're forcing me as a hostage
taker to reconcile what I've said and
maybe think about what I'm doing that is
exactly the point and that works in
hostage negotiation or some business
negotiation and and it's actually
probably more important in business
negotiations because most business
people will stay stuck in a rut on us
with a strategy that's taken them
nowhere and and they'll say they have
big goals and so I can say to a head of
sales um you want your salespeople to be
more productive but you're not going to
give him any more training how do those
things that up hmm it reminds me of the
how am I supposed to do that technique
it's a version of that is it okay yeah
exactly right you know how is a great
deference award you know one definition
of confrontation is a focus comparison
so I take your actions and I take your
words and I use the word how to compare
them it's just a focus comparison so
that in practice would be somebody asks
you for something like give me a million
dollars or I'm gonna shoot your your
aunt say well how am I supposed to do
that how am I supposed to get you the
money yeah that's just that's just a
straight how it's um that's deferential
but it shifts the entire problem
back onto them which at least wears
amount so do you how much of negotiation
especially in a hostage situation or
actually business and that for hostage
for that matter is wearing the other
party down to the point where they just
want to if it's a hostage situation go
home take whatever the hell they can get
leave or in business they just want to
go to the bathroom or get lunch and just
not be in that damn conference revenue
well it's wearing the other side down if
the other side is an aggressive
throat-cutting negotiator or if they're
from procurement sure yeah you know
depends upon who's on the other side or
if your emotions are out of control
you know your emotions are gonna get
tamp down as you get exhausted if your
emotions are out of control and negative
way you know it's important to draw a
fine line it's not emotions that are bad
it's negative emotions that are bad
positive emotions actually help us
perform better how do you harness that
and practice I would imagine it's got to
be pretty tough knowing there's a bank
full of people and you've got a harness
positive emotion I mean what are you
doing to get yourself in a positive
state oh well I mean the defensive wound
on a bank I mean I'm gonna remain
optimistic over the outcome even with
you like you're a bank robber and I'm
talk to you on the phone ideally you've
made it escape demand ideally where's
that ideal that shows that you want to
live oh right right if I make no escape
demand you're wondering if I'm just
gonna if you haven't made an escape
demand there's a really good chance that
you're planning on dying today suicide
by cotton so absence of an escape the
man is a really bad bad bad bad bad sign
in a barricade bank robbery if you got a
guy barricade in his house ain't getting
make an escape domain because that's
where he lives but if it's a if it's a
bank or something like that and there's
no escape demand you got a real problem
do you try to lead them to an escape
demand or are you actually seeing if
they'll do it because you want to get it
there a read on their situation now you
got to read them yeah you know you you
really can't lead people because
something and what they're saying is
going to give you the out so I just got
to listen for it
okay right because if you just say how
do you plan on getting out of there
they're just gonna make something up but
it's gonna be like I'm gonna start doing
bodies out to you let me go oh man so I
don't want to go there yeah you don't
accelerate that timeline by any stretch
yikes yeah youyou've also one thing
that's fascinating to me is that smart
people often don't make good negotiators
that was actually really disappointing
for me because I thought because you're
really smart guy naturally I'm a
well-studied guy I went to law school
I'm gonna be great at negotiation and
then I read the rationale for why and I
thought that crap that is me I would
totally fall into these traps can you
outline what some of that is because I
think a lot of people think they're
really good at negotiating because
they're intelligent and they can solve a
lot of problems yeah you want y'all
smart yard and the problem with that is
you might not intend it that way but it
makes me feel stupid as a as a hostage
taker or as a right yeah in business I
mean the more the more you show you're
smarter than me the less I want to be
around you because I like being around
you and that's not good news for a
long-term relationship so you know
that's a real problem the other problem
is there's an efficiency problem that
was completely obstacle we would think
if you want somebody if I want to tell
you the answer me telling you it's very
passive on your side it's what we refer
to as a didactic exchange you're just
sitting there listening passively and
there's some pretty solid data out there
that if I want to get a point across you
in in a didactic exchange where you're
just listening you're just passive
you're not you're not engaged I got to
tell you 19 times that's a lot it's a
lot it's it's it's the least efficient
way to get a point across is to tell
somebody cuz you got to tell him 19
times now if I slow down if I use
questions to affect your thinking if I
shape your thinking so that you discover
it right if then it's my idea to things
okay you discover it faster and it's
your idea so I got two things going for
me now it took less time overall
and you embrace it much more because you
feel like you thought it this would this
seems like a parenting that's be kind of
handy a parenting right like well maybe
you know how much a parent thing is just
human being the human being yeah I think
all of it yeah it's just that one human
being might be a little bit more
emotional or irrational kids more our
kids more rational than adults I don't
even know
well again definition of rationality you
can count on kids to be more optimistic
and adults to be more pessimistic so
who's better off probably the kid in a
lot of ways yeah you know there's and
that's that'll give us off unto almost a
whole different journey on cognitive
learning but kids are more present in
the moment that's why they learn faster
than adults do dogs are always worried
about outcomes always considering what
happened in the past always worried
about where it's going those two things
by definition takes you out of the
moment which means you're not learning
as much you're not figuring out the
moment as fast as you could be
kids learn languages faster than adults
do do they have this magical power no
they're not distracted by the past or
the future the way adults are and they
just have more focused in the moment and
probably less worried about looking
stupid as well that's part of the worry
they were more in the future how am I
gonna look this doesn't work out
interesting book out there called the
culture code Daniel Coyle sure yeah very
first part of it right for groups
kindergartners business school students
CEOs and I think lawyers more
interesting set of samples see it for
four teams marshmallow challenge you get
macaron dried macaroni string in a
marshmallow as a team construct the
highest tower what team wins the
kindergarten really huh third second
place of the CEOs third place are the
lawyers last place are the business
school students that's funny no surprise
lawyers coming in and coming too high
right yeah yeah but the kiddie cars
because they're there they don't care
about looking stupid in front of each
other so they don't care about make a
mistake so they try 400 different ways
and they finally find a handle ball and
they interact
then they support each other and nobody
gets bent out of shape or nobody gets
concerned or embarrassed and and they
win every time
and the Business School students are
still making spreadsheets until the
clock almost runs out let me finally
throw something together and it falls
over yeah yeah I can imagine
yeah and I actually took a harder look
at that too because I don't think it's
Business School students per se I think
it's the age range and the typical age
range you're talking about you mid 20s
to early 30s and in sort of my view my
experience that's when people are at
their some of the most individually
competitive times do you find that
negotiating with people hostage takers
for example do you see differences in
the age group like hey if someone's 19
and they take hostages is it a different
negotiation than if someone's 60 and
they take hostages or is that kind of no
yeah it would be completely different
really yeah because they're you know
their views of the past in the future
gonna be completely different and which
is gonna affect your threat level how
can you tell aside from the age what are
you looking for for their assessment of
the past in the future they're gonna
start giving it to you right away it's
remarkably that stuff in any
circumstances remarkably easy to hear if
you actually listen I'm really listening
for first you look for pronouns then you
then you'll look for levels of emotion
then you know there's gonna be
implications indicators of the future
and nearly everything that they say
they're optimistic young person or the
old either person okay either optimism
or pessimism about you know where things
are going oh you know what's in the
moment or you also look for specific
types of losses personal professional
losses are the biggest ones you know big
personal losses big professional losses
and so you're looking at people's
calculation over losses and then how
does that affect their vision of the
future okay so when you see that
somebody is maybe younger or optimistic
about the future does that bode better
for the negotiation itself or is it just
a difference that a tactic yeah well if
they're optimistic about the future then
yeah you got somebody can work with it
and you know they just staring they're
in the midst of a coping situation
sometimes gone sideways for the mom
there's a pretty good chance - just
trying to sort of get their feedback
under them emotionally and especially if
if they're optimistic about the future
then they feel like and they can they're
resilient over whatever comes out of
short term they'll get over it
so you're pulling all these different
levers depending on what people are
giving you are you mostly reacting to
the hostage taker or are you following
through on a specific set of plans
more or less that just takes different
detours based on what they're doing you
try to figure out how you can get out in
front what does that mean well I need to
start a assess you know what's driving
you know what you know what loss is
there what negative emotions there the
hostage negotiation skills are just
emotional intelligence tools I can start
to hear what negative emotions are
driving you and I know how to turn them
down I will listen for what those
positives might be and I know how to
turn those up and as soon as I started
getting a readout of where you are sort
of on you know there's a buffet of
choices that I then have and so now now
I can get proactive and start to get out
in front of something if you just need
to feel back in control your barricaded
your man of your wife instead of saying
do you want to get out us alive do you
want to see your kids again do you want
to live those are all yes oriented
questions if you really mad at your wife
I might say you want your wife to win
hmm and so that's no right I know from
my experience that when you say no you
feel in control that's why people say no
yeah so you might want to give them a
know so that they regain control I feel
like it's five times as good as yes will
ever be so knows even better than yes at
least five times better really across
the board in all circumstances all
circumstances so you're trying to get
them to say no or get to a no I should
say business deal i I lay a proposal out
in front of you instead of instead I
said saying would this work for you I'll
say is it ridiculous to think this might
work for you yeah of course I would say
no unless it's actually ridiculous
somewhere well if if their problems
with it when you say no you say no it's
not ridiculous but here are the problems
if I say would this work for you you
can't say yes but here are the problems
it's really hard to do that so you're
scared to say yes because you think
you've just agreed to the deal right so
that's when you're gonna go maybe and
then you got a dancer you got nothing
you're scared to answer at all but since
since you've already said when you've
already said no to something
whatever you say after that you don't
feel there's obligations that go along
with it I said no it doesn't work here
the problems I never said I'd agree if I
lay the problems out if I lay the
problems out and you fix them I will
agree but since I never felt like I said
that an import of fact if I fix all
those problems I now have a tailor-made
solution to you that you felt in control
right so the know is almost like a
highlighter it's like Envisat it's like
an you're seeing the invisible ink at
that point yeah it's a nice point
because you can I'm telling you exactly
what's wrong at that point and then you
can go all right circle it mentally
circling these three things change those
and then we in theory we have a deal
yeah yeah instead of just having you
shoot something down or lose control by
saying yes what you're not gonna do
especially if the stakes are really high
right right right yeah I mean we got a
lot of people that are focused and on
air they lay a proposition out to
somebody and I say well you know what's
wrong with this you know what are the
obstacles here
there's gotta be obstacles you know help
us identify them so this is cooperative
almost no matter what because you're
you're doing a deal whether the person's
kidnapped a family member or they're
robbing a bank or you're sitting across
from sharing a pot of tea at a business
negotiation that's friendly or you're
parenting your kid so these are all
cooperative regardless of whether or not
it's all a business deal seemingly yeah
I would imagine that cognitive bias
comes into play especially when emotions
are really high and you talk about this
a little bit in the book is that why you
have people all right let me let me back
this up you see these things in movies
right where there's there's a hostage
negotiation and there's like the police
captain's on the phone and the
commissioners on the phone and the
mayor's on the phone and the hostage
negotiators on the phone and then some
psycho
is on the phone and there's 15 other
people listening on headphones one is
that accurate to what is the point of
that are you trying to is it sort of
getting everybody's opinion I mean
what's the point of all this all those
people are on the phone with a bad guy
yeah I feel like I said only gonna want
to have one person on a phone you're not
gonna want to swap out a lot of people
oh I just mean listening to the call oh
well let's think you can call if people
know how to listen as a team what does
that mean everybody everybody everybody
got specific assignments stuff you're
listening for like your only job may be
to keep track of how long the
conversation lasted why is that why is
that important because the longer the
conversation it's an indicator we're
making progress because of it's sort of
a trust barometer or yeah I think that's
a fair that's that's a fair assessment
but there's and then so then I might
have somebody else you're only listening
for the negative things that they say
that sound negative Rican Street as
negative you're only listening for the
positive things they say I mean when
somebody starts talking between the
words that they say and even more
importantly the words they don't say or
their tone of voice there's more
information there than one person can
keep up on roughly we can we can listen
at a rate of about 400 words a minute we
speak at a rate of 140 160 words a
minute that's why we think we can listen
to more than one conversation just
awards but there's five times as much
information in the tone of voice and
there are in the words so 140 times five
we're banned what's odd is now you're
already shot the bandwidth of one person
Ellis I see so you've got people
listening for vocal tonality like you
said the positives and negatives and
that has to be a specific person because
I'm sitting here while you're telling me
that I'm like I could do that all myself
but that's exactly what people who get
people killed in hostage situations
think right yeah yeah yeah I hire me for
that I'll you know give me give me seven
people yeah you give me seven people to
listen to everything will all pick a
different part we'll all have very
specific assignments and we will come up
with an encyclopedia of information
ideas and clues in a ten-minute
conversation so these seven people are
these all these people
all on your team yeah negotiating with
the hostage negotiation thing and then
the call ends and then what everybody
goes and sits down and says all right
what did you hear what did you I mean
how does how do you construct this in
the moment cuz I would imagine you can't
say all right everybody file a report
about this this has to happen pretty
quick I would imagine these hostage
negotiations time is always of the
essence so you got these seven people
that you pick for your team and are they
all hostage negotiators or they're all
trained they've all got to be trained
and do they always do the same thing
like is there always a guy am I always
the voice tone guy am I always the
positive that kind of depends got
everybody's capable pretty much doing
any job our best negotiator will not be
on a phone or best negotiator will be
running the team anyway any and then
because of that like almost any one of
the team members can be on the phone
because whoever's on the phone's got the
support of seven people and we we can
almost take our least trained negotiator
and put them on a phone so that's in a
way that's almost like the least
important maybe not quite least
important least technically skilled part
of it probably if you're a coach as long
as you're coachable be a you're
coachable you're you're taking input
from people on notes and plus while
you're talking I mean you're looking
around and maybe somebody's written
something on a board and they point to
that and then you say that like in Chase
Manhattan Bank Robbery again in the book
you know I'm on the I'm on the phone I'm
talking to the guy and talk to the guy
I'm working on them to really my my
point is to get a hostage out which is
what the hostage negotiator is supposed
to do and somebody hands me a note and
says ask him if he wants to come on and
with somebody that was listening as it
as it turned out I didn't even know at
the time who was from I found out about
I think I found out like three years
later it was my friend Jamie Jamie Sudan
yo Jamie is sitting there and something
in Jamie's instincts is telling him that
this guy wants to come out more than
anything else he just hears it his
radars picking it up our subconscious
where our radar is is
is literally 20 million times faster
than our conscious and Jamie's
subconscious his instinct is picked it
up any rights asked him if he wants to
come out and I see no popping in front
of my face on where it came from doesn't
matter so I go do you want to come out
and there's a long silence on the other
in the lion and the guy says which is a
great big giant yes yeah a great big
giant please figure out how to give me
out yeah I want to come out but I don't
want to get shot I don't want to get
shot I want you beat up and as it turned
out what he was really worried about he
was worried about his buddy shoot him
when he went out the door and then his
co-conspirators laughter whatever yeah
or as soon as he got out the door he
thought the NYPD he was gonna catch a
beating and he's like I don't know how
I'd do it that's that's what we found
out later on that was what all that
meant so we continued to talk we
continued to talk and when he says I
don't know how I do that like everybody
goes like holy cow okay get him out of
there every woke us on getting him out
I'm talking I'm talking I'm talking
again pipe out I don't know maybe half
an hour later no note comes in my hand I
don't know where it's from as it turns
out it's from Jamie again and the note
says tell him you meet him outside and I
say to him how about this how about if I
meet you out from the bank yeah so did
you walk up to the bank door not quite
yeah I'm a customer yeah because
normally first of all FBI doesn't do as
a general rule we don't do face-to-face
really yeah so so we're scrambling we
decided I got to go out I don't have a
bulletproof vest I don't have a
ballistic helmet you know they're
grabbing the vest from this guy in a
grab and a helmet from this guy and I'm
trying to put this stuff long and I'm
scrambling to get outside and the plan
once I get outside is I'm gonna stand
behind one of the SWAT trucks it's got a
PA on it and I'm gonna talk to him from
the PA I'm not gonna walk up how was
that better than the phone yeah who
cares right I guess whew
and felt better you know and we don't
know what he's thinking so I and it was
it actually was it was funny haha
hostage story funny haha yeah the people
inside are like this story is not funny
but I get out there get on the PA I
start talking to him at this point I
still don't know this guy's name crazily
enough that's the way it evolved so I
said hi it's Chris I'm out here so SWAT
standard operating procedure is to
barricade the exit from the outside so
bad guy suddenly doesn't run away
so SWAT has barricaded the bank from the
outside which everyone has forgotten so
I'm trying to talk this guy out the door
we don't know how many bad guys are
inside we don't know how they're gonna
react we don't know they're gonna start
shooting we know what the hell's gonna
happen he comes to the door and you
thinking okay I was he rattles the door
it was like he's nervous right I mean oh
crap I'm trapped in here now they're on
the outside we'll go now what do we do
we forgot to unlock the door and with no
plan of how to unlock the door
so SWAT commander SWAT guys you know
those guys don't get rattled
you know they quickly they they scramble
a couple guys ballistic shield these two
guys get behind a ballistic shield you
know they go up really really really
really slow again we don't know how many
bad guys are inside and we don't know
what those gonna happen you know are
they gonna see him if somebody can jump
them who knows they just get up there
real slow to get the key and let the
door real slowly back away and Bobby
comes out I'm trying to put myself in
his shoes I don't know if I'd want to
leave I you'd after I would have to
trust you so much to be like yeah I'm
gonna stroll out of here yeah sure I
wanna I guess also I have no choice I'm
stuck in a bank with a bunch of other
criminals that I'm thinking of might
shoot me too well you know I you know
decision some people you know you make
the decision I mean what holds you back
from your decision your fears the big
the biggest fear that was holding him
back was that he was gonna get a serious
seriously beaten when he came out
did not happen and the fear the drove
amount was he had come to the
realization that every additional minute
he stayed inside since he planned on
coming out every additional minute he
say stayed inside was gonna cost him
jail time so the clock is tickin
did you tell that you told him that was
don't don't need him to think that
realize that he's come to that
conclusion on his own
there's also since you don't know for
sure what's gonna happen to the hostages
that's not resolved yet he needs to get
out of there before this goes bad on the
inside so he's all sorts of losses are
driving them to go out the door I don't
want to be here when this goes bad I
want to minimize my jail exposure every
you know the status quo when the status
quo costs you that's when you leave the
status quo whether you're in a bank
whether you're in a business deal that's
most people don't make deals because
they're comfortable with the status quo
even if they shouldn't some boiling frog
analogy you know you can turn the heat
up on a frog and it'll stay they'll get
comfortable when they should leave you
have to be aware that the status quo is
worse than the possibilities and that's
when that's when people make decisions
to change the status quo you highlight
that for him like hey you know the
longer this lasts the worse it's gonna
be that seems like something I would
hear at a movie with alright you
highlight a but not like that
right that seems you don't want him to
panic right right right you don't want
to sound like you're threatening right
yeah that sure that makes sense so you
you go back yeah you're gonna ask you
how question I I might say something
like look man and how can I go to the
judge in your behalf if you don't come
out that's saying the same thing but
it's using how question again is really
deferential and so you owe you always
you confront people with how questions
because it leaves them the option of the
decision and they don't feel backed into
a corner is this how you mentioned
before slow things down is that what
this is as well slowing things down bad
physical questions yeah and we're
slowing things down because we want them
to feel that sense of control and not
like this is moving so
fast that they don't have Congrats it's
it's the first and biggest reason the
other thing too is you know Danny
Kahneman wrote a book called Thinking
Fast and Slow yeah
slow thinking is in depth thinking
you're using a how or what question to
trigger in-depth thinking which also is
exhausting so if it's my intention to
gain the upper hand by exhausting you
that's what I'm gonna do so you're
creating more cognitive load for me to
come up with this reason a law school
some yeah yeah well I read Daniel
Kahneman's book right yeah Thinking Fast
and Slow will link to that in the show
notes as well so I'm you're really
making my brain do work right so that
I'm eventually like just beat up tired
yeah you're tired you're worn out and
you own it you know Elmo strips
ownership is is is the issue huh yeah
this is this is really interesting
because it seems like it's a really slow
game of you're grinding these guys down
a little bit but you can't make it seem
like it you can't beat them up you have
to let them just drain their energy
reserves on their own
yeah and principally again it's draining
negative energy because you don't make
good decisions in an angry state of mind
you know there's an old saying you give
a speech when your anger it's the best
speech you'll ever regret yeah I've
heard that I think probably from you but
are there tricks then for getting into a
positive emotional states when the
states are I I mean you're you said
optimism but do you want them in a
positive emotional state as well well it
would sequencing in context as a general
rule in a crisis hostage situation you
don't want to you know you don't want on
your fork you just don't want them
negative business the more positive
frame of mind we're both in the better
deal we're gonna make and the more
likely we are to want to do another deal
and that's probably the only the only
flipside difference between business
negotiation and hostage negotiation
hostage negotiators at least 90 percent
of the time I'm using the soothing
calming voice they night if and
the FM deejays less to calm you down
slow you down and maybe 10% 5% I might
have Anna beat voice selectively flip
those for business 90% of the time I
need to be upbeat 10% of the time I may
need to say something like we can't do
that instead of no so 10% you know for
me to lay something out that I need you
to think about in a serious way which it
should be a minority of the time a small
minority I'll use that's when I flip the
voices that makes sense you're switching
between this logical brain where they
have to calculate something in crunch
numbers or do something in their head
and keeping their emotions engaged
enough where they're happy to be there
with you and they feel like it's a
cooperative engagement yeah and and
you're actually you have more mental
ability in a positive frame of mind I
mean that's the mindset of flow which is
where optimum human performance is is
highly positive okay so what about when
somebody asks you for something
impossible right this is one of the the
top takeaways from never split the
difference that how am I supposed to do
that type situation but what happens
when somebody asks you for something
impossible business we can come up with
an example easily but I'm thinking in
hostage situations you hear this
ridiculous stuff in movies all the time
with they're like yeah we need a
helicopter and a private jet and you
know you need to drive the van around
the like you're you know you're not
gonna help these guys get into a
helicopter landing on the roof of Chase
Manhattan Bank it's not gonna happen but
you can't say you're delusional man
there's no chance of that happening you
have to do something when faced with an
unreasonable request how do you handle
that how am I supposed to do that and
then I mean that's that's the opening
move what if they just say land the
helicopter on the roof of the dam
building and I'm saying but if I do that
how are you gonna let the hostages go
okay so it's always make them think make
them think make them think right right
huh
yeah it's kind it's kind of crazy how it
works I finally got it flipped on me
once I'm in a we're doing a simulated
terrorists prison takeover we're doing
some training interestingly enough we
weren't Jamaica and I'm playing a bad
guy and I'm the most experienced
negotiator fun I had a great time yeah
plus I figure you know I I'm better than
either my opinion I'm better than
negotiate is on the other side okay and
I'm saying you know you got a I'm
holding these people you gotta let my
colleagues out of jail and did ago
shared on the other side says he wants
to let them go and then it up until that
moment the thought in my head that I
hadn't thought it all the way through
cuz it would be enough just to let him
out of jail
sure let him run around Kingstown yeah
well they go half a mile and a wait for
him and pick him up again it's not just
how do I get him out of jail how do I
make sure they get away I hadn't thought
it all the way through and it never even
occurred to me till they asked me that
question in a simulation and I remember
saying to myself I didn't think this all
the way through so even you who kind of
maybe developed a lot of his tactic it
works yeah a good question
makes you slow thinking Danny Kahneman
thinking in depth thinking you become
aware that you haven't thought it all
the way through you immediately see it
falling apart two steps further than you
thought and that completely stops you in
your tracks completely which is the
point of the question stop the other
side in their tracks
so you pause I know that the formula
this is like pause apologize mirror
slash applies a question so can you
break down that formula a little bit the
the pause is clear and then you
literally say sorry sorry Jordan but how
am I supposed to do that is that is that
kind of how this is applied yeah yeah
and it's that simple it is as stupid as
it sounds absolutely so your girlfriend
and kid must use this on you all the
time you know it's a great way of
letting somebody know also it's another
way of saying you just asked him
possible with me you know it forces
good how am I supposed to do that
question forces the person being asked
to take a hard look at exactly what
they're asking the other person to do
now they might not change their mind
that's not the point the point is to get
him to stop and think okay cuz I'm
thinking people right now are going wait
a minute they're just gonna tell me
exactly how they expect me to do that
but that's okay well two things first of
all everybody imagines it yeah that's
how it simulates in my head right that's
how everybody simulates in in your head
now slightly out of nine out of ten
times it doesn't work out that way
and so we got a lot of people Wow well
one kind of doesn't realize there that
you success percentages you'd be happy
with those percentages if you went to
Vegas you got a gambling system if are
you gonna do is it works more than 51%
of the time or more and pretty soon
they're renaming the casino after you
right sure yeah so again or you're
banned from the casino which is more
like but every now and then somebody on
the other side says because you have to
if you want the deal that's actually a
great answer because everybody's job is
the negotiators find out how far we can
push the other side without driving
words from the table right and when
somebody says if you want the deal
you'll do it you now know that's as far
as we go what happens when people get
angry this is probably happening far
less in business situations but I would
imagine hostage negotiators or people
who work hotshot stage takers they get
pissed off they're like look man I'm the
one with the gun I'm the one with the
civilians stop jerking me around I'm
tired of answering your stupid questions
I'm hungry I'm tired it's hot in here
quit asking me stupid stuff and his
which should completely baked your brain
hostage negotiations are calm more than
business negotiations okay how is that
even possible
I haven't run into a single business
negotiator doesn't have at least five
stories of somebody on the other side
screaming at him slam the door calling
them names refusing to call names on a
phone
constantly everybody's got those stories
yes hostage negotiators have one too
okay why is that the case well again
because as soon as the other side feels
listen to why get mad and a hostage
negotiator starts listening right away
business negotiation we sit down I go
like I ain't interested in what I you
had to say you're gonna listen to me
right I hold all the cards I gotta win
my boss needs to see me as the smart guy
in the room yeah yeah we don't do that
as hostage we calm people down real fast
how do you do that for first its voice I
mean FM DJ voice i FM DJ voice actually
what does that really mean before I
finish the sentence if you can see me or
if you could hear me and if we're on the
phone you could hear me my tone of voice
has gone in and hit something in your
brain called mirror in there runs those
mirror neurons have triggered an actual
chemical reaction in your brain
chemicals are being dumped into your
brain and into your system that slow you
down before I've even finished a
sentence that's how that happens and
that works even with like psychopath
sociopath type folks that don't maybe
everybody's got mirror and everybody's
got mirror neurons okay I was I'm not
sure on that I you're probably right I
haven't the psychopaths the sociopath
that's a result of principally of
conditioning nobody's contending that
there are functional physical things
missing from their brains they're
talking about something happened in
their development interestingly enough
there was a there was a syndrome the
reason why people hold babies and
hospitals and in orphanages now because
if children aren't held enough in the
first year of their life they have
that's when they learned how to bond and
if you haven't been held enough in the
first year in many children and
orphanages or abandoned or in hospitals
for extended periods of time are not
picked up and held they haven't learned
how to bond so they end up with
developmental stuff they they have
issues in the rest of the life bonding
with people and if so that something is
absent that
after they were born okay I think I
vaguely remember reading about this it's
just been a while some of those these
books all blur together after a while
especially there especially with all the
junk science out so you just need to
read one book yeah just one just never
split the difference boss I'm imagining
well I guess that's the book you
recognize in two thing that you should
mention yeah that's my idea I think I
came up with that you identify and label
emotions when people are feeling them to
calm him down I read that I thought that
was a brilliant tactic it's how does
this work in practice I'm screaming at
you stop asking me stupid freaking
questions send in the pizza and two
million dollars I'm gonna start whacking
some of these dumb kids I got here you
know stuck on this Bank what are you
doing to calm me down at this point yes
you're listening but what else I mean
I'm just pissed off it's been 13 hours I
got nothing left in the tank I'm over it
I'm gonna say I'm gonna say sounds like
you're mad at this whole situation it
sounds like you want to get out of there
and what does that do the labeling what
does that do to my lizard brain the
simplicity of it will obscure how
effective it is what I'm actually trying
to do if I say something that sounds
like when that hit your pitch your brain
you actually ask yourself is that the
way it sounds it triggers a thought in
your brain like a logical aural of
rational and identify and will it
triggers an identification a labeling of
it if you will it causes you to
contemplate it sort of as an issue
decide what you're thinking they did a
the book is the upward spiral they I
wish to remember the author's name they
did an actual experiment they induced
negative emotions in people by showing
pictures picture made him scared and sad
made him lonely wherever it is they're
monitoring the neural activity I show
you picture to makes you angry and a
specific part of the brain lights up
it's a portion of the amygdala where the
negative emotions are housed and that
lights up the electrical activity is
going crazy crazy crazy I show you the
picture and I just say what are you
feeling and looking at it if you're
feeling afraid
you say I was feeling of afraid and they
the part of the brain that was lighting
up now stops lighting up so labeling the
emotion blunts it or gets rid of a
triggering of contemplating the emotion
not denying it not suppressing it not
pushing it not trying to get rid of it
anywhere just a triggering of an
awareness of a negative and every time
they did that that portion of the brain
that was lighting up stop lighting up
not some of the time every time so if I
say it sounded like it just tired of
being here that causes you to think
about it and the part of you that was
frustrated tired annoyed it doesn't you
don't mean for it to happen but that
part of the brain stops lighten up what
if it's a positive emotion do I not want
to label it then that's the stupid thing
because positives then reinforce
positives so I do want to so I want to
label negative emotions too blunt them
and label positive emotions to really
it's like the North and South Pole of a
magnet has the opposite effect complete
exact same device complete opposite
effect huh why is that that I haven't
you know well first of all I don't know
why it caused the negative part of the
amygdala to shut off I just know it did
you know and they said there's so much
of the brain they got no idea why it
works they just know it's there a little
bit like gravity we really have no idea
how gravity works nobody's jumping off
you ain't gonna go jump off the Empire
State Building because gravity is still
gonna be yeah I don't think it works
today
yeah I don't understand it therefore I'm
not gonna hit the ground right so it's
still there and the emotional reactions
in our brain are very much like them you
know do we completely understand them
but their effects are unmistakable
from practice the effects of labeling
positives are unmistakable if if you say
I want a car and a million dollars a car
means you want to escape you want to
live I'll say it sounds like you want to
get out of this okay so that will
reinforce your positive desire to live
yeah so you're not necessarily even
sounds like you're reading between the
lines you're not saying okay let's talk
about the car let's talk about the money
you're actually reading their intention
instead of what they're actually the
more you read between the lines are more
powerfully effective huh because you're
telling them why you're actually let me
repeat that why is that the case well it
you know it's it's triggering the
recognition inside and again this is a
gravity issue
I just know works and we see it on a
regular basis and we see it actually
kind of in really funny ways his is a
great one with customer service people
because they're they're battered
children right you call customer service
as in everybody it's a dream that all
day every day
you know we wonder why they're in a bad
mood they're getting screamed that all
day every day I'm gonna phone with this
woman and I'm not doing a great job and
she's like give me short answers she's
barely standing on a phone or tone is
really clipped and well she's got me on
hold on trying to fix an airline take it
with no fees sure I can I can just
imagine her turning to her colleagues
and saying this guy's lucky I'm on the
phone with him at all mm-hmm all right
so let's go into bizarro world
you know tactical empathise what's the
other side to you not what's your view
or what's true
tactical empathy is what now tactical
empathy is what we use in the book
Daniel Goleman would call it cognitive
empathy we call it tactical because
since we know how the brain works we
might as well use in a tactical fashion
so if she's saying that I'm lucky that
she's talking to me at all in her view
of the world she's being generous oh I
see so she gets back on the phone with
me and the first thing out of my mouth
is I appreciate how generous you've been
with me so far
and I can feel her mood instantly change
and her tone instantly changed and she
says I give me another moment to look
into this yeah turns out I can solve
your problem pretty easily I just didn't
want to but you don't want to be fear of
course why she puts this she put cuz
this guy's been a jerk
like everybody else but I you know I
lines I know there's a positive emotion
in there that if I can punch it if I can
hit that target and tile it up it's a
pretty good chance you're gonna change
your mind
and that's exactly what happened she's
not in a limit I something else I got a
chair she puts me on hold
she comes back on all frees away they
get the ticket changed so we reinforce
people's what current opinion of
themselves or we just try to read their
mind in the moment and then tell them
what yeah well yeah it's it's all kind
of gonna be implied its current opinion
of themselves depending upon which you
want to reinforce you know what what
what do they tell themselves in a moment
you know if if they're acting stingy
then their view is if you're lucky to
have any other time they're actually
being generous you know sometimes it
with a little practice you can hear
around this stuff pretty fast and that's
really all it takes it's just practice
huh okay I like that example a lot
actually
so this dovetails nicely with what you
call the Black Swan rule which is don't
treat other people the way you want to
be treated treat them the way they need
to be treated right yeah so can you
flush that out or is that kind of what
we just talked about or is there more to
it no it's it's really more that you
know the assumption that everybody
assumes they're normal when in fact at
best you may be normal with the third
other people out there so you get into
this thing called well I'm going to
treat you the way I want to be treated
you know if I'm gonna sort of I want
answers so give me answers and I think
I'm treating you the way I want to be
treated I like people to be direct with
me I'm gonna be direct with you well
that's probably not true you know you
you may not want to be spoken to that
directly that bluntly
if I'm doing a Golden Rule I like to be
asked I love clarity I claim I crave
clarity I once had colleagues say that I
I crave clarity Eric Barker writes a
fantastic blog and book of the same name
barking up the wrong tree
he's his clarity's violence you know
trying to try to get clear let's get
clear about this
it often is perceived as a very violent
exchange
verbal exchange so you know you got to
be real careful about
assuming the how you're wired is how
somebody else is why because you can put
something on them that they just might
not resonate with so we try to read what
they need and give them what they need
instead of assuming that they need the
same things as us exactly okay yeah and
what sort of principal factors do you
look for you look for the communication
style whether they were assertive
cooperative was the other one five five
make friends fight fly to make friends
okay yeah yeah yeah well you know really
to some degree everybody's gonna want to
be heard out you know which is everybody
wants to be heard that's why I show up
in a negotiation I want you to hear me
so I if I start hearing you out plus
it's gonna give me a good read on which
of the types you are you know have you
thought through every detail you pride
yourself on the details have you done a
lot of research on me cuz you pride
yourself on relationships are you really
firm on what you want cuz you pride
yourself on getting what you want those
are basically the three times you know
so I'm gonna let you start talking and
I'm gonna I'm gonna start to get a real
clear feel for where you are plus also
when I see maybe some holes if I adapt
to how you are you're gonna let me show
them to you you know where does this not
add up well the book is loaded with very
detailed negotiation examples from both
hostage situations and business
situations there's a lot more than we
could get to here and it's I think it's
probably got to be one of the most
widely regarded books on negotiation
even if even if you do say so yourself
so thank you very much for your time
my pleasure thanks for you
you